CS-UH 2012 Software Engineering
Sprint 3B: Redesign with Design Patterns
Spring 2026

Sprint 3B (S3B)
Learning Objectives
Use appropriate design patterns to improve flexibility and modularity
Fix previous design issues, refactoring code base where needed
Incorporate support for new, more complex requirements
Ensure continuous integration works correctly

Sprint Backlog
The development team is now ready to work on the two new features and moved them to this sprint's backlog.
1. Feature 6: Create Recurring Classes
As a fitness trainer, I want to create recurring fitness classes (e.g., daily or weekly), so that I don’t have to manually reenter the same fitness class multiple times.
2. Feature 7: Configure Notifications
As someone registered in a fitness class, I want to choose how I receive reminders (e.g., email and/or Telegram and/or
SMS etc.), so I can stay informed in the ways that suit me.
Your existing implementation is likely not sufficient to support these changes without a significant redesign. This sprint is
focused on implementing a cleaner, extensible design that can support these features and future growth.

Tasks
Task 1: Redesign and Refactor
Fix each violated design principle reported in Sprint 3A (if there are other instances of this same violation beyond what
you reported, fix them as well -- the goal is to have clean code)
Fix each code smell reported in Sprint 3A (if there are other instances of this same violation beyond what you reported, fix
them as well -- the goal is to have clean code)
Identify at least one design pattern that you will use to implement the new features. Explain why this design pattern is
applicable and how you refactored your system to use it.

Task 2: Implement the new features
Implement the new features following clean code and design principles, and using the design pattern you have identified.
For Feature 7, you will need to support email and telegram. However, your implementation of this feature MUST
allow you to easily add future notification options (e.g., sms/whatsapp/slack/discord etc) with minimal modifications
to the system. Hence, identifying a suitable design pattern to use is essential.

Task 3: Update and add new tests
Ensure your refactored system is still functional and testable. Update existing unit tests to match your new design and
add new unit tests. You must maintain the 90% statement coverage. All submitted tests must pass.

Task 4: Ensure that your CI works correctly
Ensure that your CI workflow gets triggered with every push or PR to main.
Your CI must pass.
Your workflow file must NOT use hard-coded environment variables. Proper usage of github secrets is a must for this
part.

Task 5: Diagrams and Documentation
Create an updated class diagram that reflects your current design.
Explain the key differences to the class diagram from Sprint 3A.

Deliverables
Your GitHub repo that contains:
Refactored backend code that implements all new features in an extensible way, and uses at least one design
pattern.
Updated unit tests that match the new code and all pass and achieve 90% statement coverage.
Updated CI file that runs successfully (must pass).
Updated Swagger API documentation.
Updated README file with any instructions we need to run your code, as well as an explanation of the endpoints
related to the new features.
A new report under reports/redesign.md that includes:
Brief explanation of how you fixed each violated design principle and code smell. How did you refactor the code?
What is the new structure of the code to remove the violation? Your fix MUST have removed the violation/code smell.
Explain which design patterns were used for either/both of the new features and for any other parts in your code.
Explain why these pattern(s) were chosen.
Class diagram that reflect the refactored system with an explanation of the key differences to the class diagram from
Sprint 3A.
Description of who was responsible for which part of this sprint. Nonetheless, each member should be familiar with
the design and construction of all parts.
Tag the release as s3b_done with "Sprint 3B" as the release title

Guidelines for Member Contributions
Each team member should:
Contribute to the design, refactoring, or testing.
Be able to explain the reasoning behind at least one design change.
Contribute to the updated diagrams or documentation.

Acceptance Criteria and Grading
Total grade: 29.5 marks (as below) + 0.5 marks peer evaluation = 30
Criteria

Grade

Created tag and release as above

0.25

System runs by following ReadMe instructions (if we can't run your code, then we will not be able to test the
features below and you will loose additional marks there)
Readme file explains new features' endpoints
Swagger UI page is updated with any new/changed endpoints with clear documentation so we know what to
run

0.25
0.5
0.5

Feature 6 works as expected (we will run the code and see)

2

Feature 6 is implemented in an easily extensible way (e.g., what if new types of events are introduced later on?)

2

Feature 7 works as expected (attendees can choose email and/or telegram and receive notifications
accordingly)
Feature 7 is implemented in an easily extensible way (e.g., what if we now want to add a third type of
notification through SMS)

2

2

New code applies at least one design pattern correctly

3

Class diagram correctly reflects new design and implementation

3

Tests are updated/rewritten and cover the refactored functionality (overall 90% coverage maintained)

3

All violations and code smells have been fixed

2

redesign.md provides all required sections with clear explanations. Report is properly formatted and well-

written.

5

CI works correctly, passes, and correctly uses github secrets

2

Team collaboration evident through commit history, proper use of Issues, and properly reviewed PRs

2

Note: The 29.5 marks are graded as a group. The peer review assessment is graded individually. Assume your group received
a grade of 28/29.5 on the above criteria: members who submitted their peer review would get 28.5/30; those who didn't
would get 28/30.

Individual Oral Exam 2 (Separate Individual Grade)
Each student will participate in an individual oral exam.
You should be prepared to:
Explain what major refactorings and design changes happened in your system.
Justify specific design decisions.
Walk through a part of the refactored code.
Explain the selected design patterns and walk through their implementations in the code.
Explain how your redesign addressed a flaw or violation identified in Sprint 3A and show it in the code.

